Enhancing and standardizing Clickhouse documentation (#604)
spiceai/docs: spiceaidocs/docs/components/data-connectors/clickhouse.md

description: 'Clickhouse Data Connector Documentation'
---

ClickHouse is a fast, open-source columnar database management system designed for online analytical processing (OLAP) and real-time analytics. This connector enables federated/accelerated SQL queries on top of a Clickhouse server.

```yaml
datasets:
  - from: clickhouse:my.dataset
    name: my_dataset
```

## Configuration

### `from`

> The `from` field for the Clickhouse connector takes the form of `from:path_to_my_dataset` where `path_to_my_dataset` is the path to the Dataset within Clickhouse. In the example above it would be `my.dataset`.

Reviewer: We should also say that the first part before the period is the clickhouse DB (defaults to `clickhouse_db` parameter, or `default` if not specified)

Author: Fixed

description: 'Clickhouse Data Connector Documentation'
---

> ClickHouse is a fast, open-source columnar database management system designed for online analytical processing (OLAP) and real-time analytics. This connector enables federated/accelerated SQL queries on top of a Clickhouse server.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ClickHouse is a fast, open-source columnar database management system designed for online analytical processing (OLAP) and real-time analytics. This connector enables federated SQL queries from a ClickHouse server.
```

ClickHouse is not an accelerator

```yaml
datasets:
  - from: clickhouse:my.dataset
    name: my_dataset
```

## Configuration

### `from`

> The `from` field for the Clickhouse connector takes the form of `from:db.dataset` where `db.dataset` is the path to the Dataset within Clickhouse. In the example above it would be `my.dataset`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `from` field for the ClickHouse connector takes the form of `from:db.dataset` where `db.dataset` is the path to the Dataset within ClickHouse. In the example above it would be `my.dataset`.
```

If `db` is not specified in either the `from` field or the `clickhouse_db` parameter, it will default to the `default` database.

### `name`

The dataset name. This will be used as the table name within Spice.

```yaml
datasets:
  - from: clickhouse:my.dataset
    name: cool_dataset
```

```sql
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM cool_dataset;
```

```shell
+----------+
| count(*) |
+----------+
| 6001215  |
+----------+
```

### `params`

> The Clickhouse data connector can be configured by providing the following `params`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ClickHouse data connector can be configured by providing the following `params`:
```

| Parameter Name                 | Definition                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| ------------------------------ | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |

> | `clickhouse_connection_string` | The connection string to use to connect to the Clickhouse server. This can be used instead of providing individual connection parameters.                                                                                                                                                                               |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `clickhouse_connection_string` | The connection string to use to connect to the ClickHouse server. This can be used instead of providing individual connection parameters.                                                                                                                                                                               |
```

> | `clickhouse_host`              | The hostname of the Clickhouse server.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `clickhouse_host`              | The hostname of the ClickHouse server.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
```

> | `clickhouse_tcp_port`          | The port of the Clickhouse server.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `clickhouse_tcp_port`          | The port of the ClickHouse server.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
```

description: 'Clickhouse Data Connector Documentation'
---

> ClickHouse is a fast, open-source columnar database management system designed for online analytical processing (OLAP) and real-time analytics. This connector enables federated SQL queries on top of a Clickhouse server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ClickHouse is a fast, open-source columnar database management system designed for online analytical processing (OLAP) and real-time analytics. This connector enables federated/accelerated SQL queries on top of a Clickhouse server.
```

## Configuration

### `from`

> The `from` field for the Clickhouse connector takes the form of `from:path_to_my_dataset` where `path_to_my_dataset` is the path to the Dataset within Clickhouse. In the example above it would be `path.to.my_dataset`.

Reviewer: Clickhouse only supports a two-level path scheme, of the format `database_name.table_name`. So specifying a three part path here is incorrect. This documentation of `from` should explain how the logical grouping model of clickhouse maps to the path selector. i.e. `db.table` or just `table` for the `default` db

See https://clickhouse.com/docs/en/guides/creating-tables

Author: Fixed

| `clickhouse_user`              | The username to connect with.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| `clickhouse_pass`              | The password to connect with.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| `clickhouse_secure`            | Optional. Specifies the SSL/TLS behavior for the connection, supported values:<br /> <ul><li>`true`: (default) This mode requires an SSL connection. If a secure connection cannot be established, server will not connect.</li><li>`false`: This mode will not attempt to use an SSL connection, even if the server supports it.</li></ul> |

> | `connection_timeout`           | Optional. Specifies the connection timeout in milliseconds.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |

Reviewer: This should support specifying the timeout in the same format as our other timeout parameters, in a human readable format like `10s` or `1m`.

Reviewer: I don't think we need to do this now, but we should at least create an issue to track it, since its inconsistent with our other connectors.

Reviewer 3: Issue created to track the fix: https://github.com/spiceai/spiceai/issues/3710

      clickhouse_user: my_user
      clickhouse_pass: ${secrets:my_clickhouse_pass}
      connection_timeout: 10000
      clickhouse_secure: false
```

### Specifying a connection timeout

```yaml
datasets:
  - from: clickhouse:my.dataset
    name: my_dataset
    params:
      clickhouse_connection_string: tcp://my_user:${secrets:my_clickhouse_pass}@localhost:9000/my_database
      connection_timeout: 10000
      clickhouse_secure: true
```

### Using a connection string

```yaml
datasets:
  - from: clickhouse:my.dataset
    name: my_dataset
    params:
      clickhouse_connection_string: tcp://my_user:${secrets:my_clickhouse_pass}@localhost:9000/my_database?connection_timeout=10000&secure=true
```

## Using secrets

> There are currently three supported [secret stores](/components/secret-stores/index.md):

Reviewer: Update

Author: Updated!
